The Color Psychology of Orange

How does the color orange make you feel? Orange can be a very strong and energetic color. Like yellow and red, it can be very attention-grabbing, which is perhaps why it is often used in advertising. People often describe orange as bright, happy, and uplifting. In some cases, however, it can seem too bright and overwhelming. Much like purple, orange tends to be a controversial color. People tend to either love it or hate it.

Orange is very blatant and vulgar. It makes you immediately start having feelings.- Wolf Kahn

The Color Psychology of Orange
Orange is a combination of yellow and red and is considered an energetic color.
Orange calls to mind feelings of excitement, enthusiasm, and warmth.
Orange is often used to draw attention, such as in traffic signs and advertising.
Orange is energetic, which is perhaps why many sports teams use orange in their uniforms, mascots, and branding.
Orange is also the color of bright sunsets and fruits such as oranges and tangerines, so the many people might associate the color with the beauty of a setting sun or the refreshing taste of citrus.
Orange is also linked to autumn and the color of dying leaves and pumpkins.
The color is also heavily linked to Halloween in the United States, so it can sometimes have a dark or even cartoonish association.
How does orange make you feel? Do you associate orange with certain qualities or situations? It is important to remember that the symbolism and associations of the color orange are not universal. Cultural differences often play a role in how people relate to color. In the U.S., people might associate orange with prison uniforms, while in other countries it is linked to royalty and spirituality.

The way we see orange used in the environment plays a major role in how we feel about it. If you associate the color with pleasant autumn evenings spent with family and friends, then you will likely have strong positive associations with the color.

Learn what others have to say about the color orange in some of the comments that readers have shared.

Orange Is Spiritual
"The color orange makes me think of spirituality and compassion. I find that meditation is helped when I am close to orange objects." - Sikhme

Orange Is Energetic
"Not my absolute favourite, but here is my insight on orange. It's very energetic, it's used to draw attention, it's flashy and pop-artish, it's enthusiastic, warm and a bit childish. It also reminds me of Autumn, cats, tulips, ginger hair, cheese, sweet potatoes, carrots... The list just goes on and on!" - Alice

Orange Is Attention-Getting
"Orange is the color of loving life and vitality. It sparks enthusiastic response and energetic feelings within. I think if orange is one of your favorite colors- then you are a lover of people, having socialization, life in general, and being noticed. Orange evokes happy feelings and energizing feelings for me. I love this color. This is a definite color to wear when one is looking to be friendly and social and when one needs to brighten their day. Orange really stands out if you put it against a bright turquoise or a darker shade of purple." - Adrian

Orange Is Happy
"My favorite color is orange, because it invokes a feeling of warm, sunny days. It is bright and cheerful and also makes me think of love, in all its manifestations. I think of the Dali Lama, in his bright orange robes, radiating goodness and peace." - Dobidoo