The Color Psychology of Pink

Color psychology suggests that different colors can have an impact on our moods, feelings, and even behaviors. The color pink, for example, is thought to be a calming color associated with love, kindness, and femininity.

How does the color pink make you feel? Many people immediately associate the color with all things feminine and girly. It might also bring to mind romance and holidays such as Valentine's Day. Some shades of pale pink are described as relaxing, while very bright, vibrant shades can be stimulating or even aggravating.

The Color Psychology of Pink
There are a few things to note about the psychology behind the color pink:

Pink is essentially a light red and is usually associated with love and romance.
Pink is thought to have a calming effect. One shade known as "drunk-tank pink" is sometimes used in prisons to calm inmates. Sports teams sometimes paint the opposing teams locker room pink to keep the players passive and less energetic.
While pink's calming effect has been demonstrated, researchers of color psychology have found that this effect only occurs during the initial exposure to the color. When used in prisons, inmates often become even more agitated once they become accustomed to the color.
Pink is often described as a feminine color, perhaps largely due to associations people form during early childhood. 'Girls toys' are usually pink and purple, while 'boys toys' are often red, yellow, green, or blue.
Since the color is so strongly associated with femininity, people sometimes associate the color with qualities that are often thought of as feminine, such as softness, kindness, nurturance, and compassion.

What Does the Color Pink Mean?
The Iowa Hawkeyes famously have a pink visiting team locker room at their Kinnick Stadium. The idea for the pink locker room was conceived by Iowa coach Hayden Fry, who had majored in psychology at Baylor University and believed that the all-pink room would mess with the minds of the opposing teams. 

It is important to remember, however, that color associations are heavily affected by individual experiences and cultural influences. People who link the color to pleasant memories are more likely to find it a pleasing and enjoyable color. Those who associate pink with negative experiences or people may develop unpleasant associations.

How does pink make you feel? Do you associate pink with certain qualities or situations? You can discover how other people react to the color pink in some of the following responses that our readers have shared over the years.

Pink Is Joyful
Some readers have described pink as a color that evokes feelings of joy and happiness. "Although green used to be my favorite color, pink has the strongest and deepest emotional influence to me," wrote one reader. "The color pink to me has a deeply joyful vibe to it. Like being "home." A familiar friendly place deep within everyone's heart where there are no worries, you are never lonely, you have everything in life that you ever wanted. You are loved and accepted by everyone."

Pink Is Creative
For other readers, pink gives off a creative and artistic vibe. "I do not wear pink but I am drawn to it for my study where I do not have to compromise with my husband," said another reader. "It is a happy colour and it makes me feel creative. For the first time in my life I am decorating with pink, hot pink."

Pink Is Feminine and Vibrant
Many readers have written to suggest that pink is both feminine as well as vibrant. "Feminine, attractive, vibrant,. Love pink lipstick, clothing, or tops worn in contrast with black. Bright pink, or paler no matter what age makes me feel flirty, astute and can accomplish what I need to that day. I associate it with 'sugar and spice and all things nice.' Flowers, romantic gestures and kindness," wrote reader Jill Cleggett.

Pink Is Childish
Of course, some people have a slightly less positive view of the color pink. "Perhaps my opinion is 'kids TV bias,' but it really seams to represent every single little girl on the planet(according to television), which has a very profound effect on kids. That would also explain why every toy, doll or dress my little sister has is..guess what? PINK!. It's almost like to little girls it's "if you don't love pink your not really a girl." You can notice this at schools Very easily. And, on the contrary, little boys hate pink," wrote one reader.

Pink Is Refreshing
"Pink makes me think of springtime flowers and all things fresh and new. It seems like a really inspiring color. If I could, I would paint my room all pink so that I could always feel that sense of inspiration and renewal." explained one reader named Gemma.

Pink Is Euphoric
One common response from readers has been that different shades of pink can evoke different moods. For example, one reader explained:

"Hot pink is a vivacious and joyous. I think that hot pink embodies who I try to be as person: full of life and character. I didn't really gravitate toward this color until my late teens; as I was initially a lover of red. However, red comes across as harsh and overly bold, while pink comes across as gentle and feminine. Don't get me wrong, I think that red can be very flattering, but it just doesn't suit me. Another reason I love pink is ?it's versatility. More muted pinks represent youth and innocence while loud forms of pink elude sexiness and boldness. Every time I come across anything in my favorite pink shade, I can't help but stop and admire it's inherent beauty. Pink is my euphoria."

A Word From Verywell
While people often respond to the color pink in similar ways, it is important to remember that the psychology behind any color can depend upon many different factors. Past experiences, cultural influences, personal taste, and other factors can all impact how a person feels about a particular color, including the color pink.